"As I said yesterday, even you follow these texts in a way, but what I'm saying is something that
you can apply to every practice, not just every practice, but every session, every session that we
begin, every day we begin, every breathe we breathe, breathe we can apply.
It's not just something once and a while in the blue moon we are going to apply and do that. It is
what we should. This is what we practice.
And that is all the great masters. Everyone says start with the foundations, start with the ground,
stand. It's like earth where we stand. There is no way we can hover all the time in the sky. Once
and a while we will have good, what's called a kayak.
Glide. Glide. Maybe we can jump on the cliffs once and a while. And we are lucky, maybe it flew for
maybe 50, 20, 100 hours, whatever.
But otherwise, we have to stand on this foundation. Foundation is grown, is why we are going to
grow. And deepening in a tall and strong map from there, then we can fly as birds.
Narudas and not kind of dependent to any other means of the sports we do. That is what. And to do
this, as I said yesterday, the four renunciation thoughts.
Four renunciation thoughts are not just only we do, once and a while. Every time we should reflect
this teaching. In the teaching of the great master, Kim Po-Makchon, and it's not just only him, but
he said, we don't have this four renunciation thought, even at the beginning of our session, our
practice won't become smooth.
Because not observing in the heart is the only hovering on the brain. Heart is what we like to
observe. We like to make meaning for this practice from time we started till we end, till we are
going to conclude the practices.
Beautiful, powerful, the college, college practices, not just time recorded practices, history
practices, we like to practice. That's beautiful qualities.
And that's why for example, we are in retreat. Retreat is what what means, really. Observe with the
teaching in the heart. That is what really actually retreat means. Observe with the teaching into
the heart, not hovering, floating on the surface of the brain and coming from the right ear and
leaving from another ear as emergency exits.
That is not the religion. Retreat. And that is not the practice. We practice and do retreat,
observing teaching into the heart and make ourself as done as teaching. That is what it is.
Therefore, to do this for renunciation is so important. Essence of renunciation I said yesterday.
What? Joy in appreciation and joyful effort and make useful and then thoughtful.
Thought for every hour activities. Activities that means what every activity. I'm vaguely saying
that. There is three activities. It's called body activities. The speech activities and mind
activities.
Thoughtful. Nobody is going to thoughtful from outside way expected. We're not going to use any sc
um, words, and blame someone. We're going to take full responsibility. Ourself, full responsibility.
To ourself, we need to come to the heart, our heart, our practices. We're going to take completely
full responsibility. And so thoughtful with the activities of the body, thoughtful activities of
the speech, the verbal communication, and thoughtful with our mental activities.
That is the starting point. Thought is the starting point of the activity of the verbal and body.
Every hour movement we do, by speech, by physical, all reflected, all is ignited from this
emptiness mind. From this emptiness mind, unseen mind. From this mind, it started. All that. And
therefore, thoughtful.
Thoughtful. And then what is next is have courage. In the samsara there are so many difficult
troubles that we know. But it's learning ground in the Buddha said, in the Buddha teaches it. It's
learning ground. It's exercise playground.
And therefore, be courage. Be strong. Not just only always kind of perishable. And kind of very per
ishable and sensitive. And kind of the pushed and knocked way instantly. Kind of small grass, hollow
or feathery. Feathery. Be courage. Be strong. Strong.
That is the essence of this forenal sessions. With this understanding, then we also that all
reflected the samsara cause and effects. Samsara cause and effects. As samsara has cause and sams
ara has effect.
And that you avoid that to move from that. Then we follow the path. Path is in the Buddha's first
teaching is at Noble Path. That is the first starting point of the journey. When we take the
journey, that is what we should begin with that at aspect.
And as aspect I again all at I listed and condense it so that we can apply little more tangibly. As
not just I did, I follow in footsteps of the great masters and those great teachers.
Teachers and the Buddha himself taught. They all can be summarized this head into three. The
personal training. The individually training practices. Extraordinary trainer practices.
And those are known as the morality, concentration and the vistas. Morality is something out
reaching volatice. This is something more related with our physical and verbal things. Outreaching.
The people can see, look, you can see in the field. That is known as morality. And the good, this
morality is good for you. Morality is good for the others. Acting is good for you individually and
acting is good for the others.
It is also good examples of others and good example yourself. Inspiring yourself. Inspiring others.
For example, they said the morality is how important in the teaching. First five students.
The first five students is one of those known as Tatu. Tatu is the way he act, the way he speak,
the way he move. He is so gentle, so beautiful, so peaceful.
Among all the students, the Arhatas, the golden mortems, the glowing golden mortems of the students
, of the Buddhas. Among that, Tatu was the best Buddha. Acknowledged in it, enormous.
Tatu's conduct is the best among all Arhatas. Those Arhatas, great Arhatas, stainless masters,
realization beings.
There are always in the teaching, there are golden mortems, surrounded by the big golden mortems.
Buddha himself. Such great golden mortems. Among that, Tatu was one of them.
And how the great up disciple of the Buddha Shakyamuni, the shari potter, mongol potter, we have
here, stage of that. And standing here in the right and left side of the Buddha and also there too.
The Buddha here, the shari potter, mongol potter. How first shari potter become the disciple of the
Buddha Shakyamuni? Because of Tatu, master of Arhata, Tatu's conduct.
Where he dressed up, where he's moving, where he's spoken, where he's gazing, looking, it's so upl
ifting. And shari potter was far distance in the Rajaguni, in the nearby bamboo grooves, in the
center of India or northern India.
When he saw, Tatu, this must be something that's so special. He must be itchy or he must be called
nakto. It's complete nourishment. He looks like a so nourishment person.
A master contract to this person to give. That way he got this nourishment, called nakto.
And he went, immediately went, because of his gesture, his movement, his conduct is so appealing,
so uplifting, so calming, so beautiful. Beautiful.
And then Tatu, so shari potter went and asked, "Who are you and who is your teacher?" And what this
teacher told him.
And shari potter, I mean Tatu said, he said, "I'm Tatu and I'm disciple of great sage known as Bod
ashaktamuni."
And moment he, shari potter heard Bodashaktamuni, it meant something, completely changed himself,
completely. Like it electrocuted through his like walls or the veins, really kind of like
completely racked up something.
And then he asked, "What was his teaching? What he giving?" And then shari potter, so Tatu said, "
He's teaching that what we can't."
So all the pranamana comes from the cause, and that cause is taught by the Buddha, good cause
taught by the sage, and we are out of that, also taught by the sage.
That is roughly translated, but in Sanskrit we can't always. That was the teaching of the sage.
Thakur repeated that one word, shari potter god, the first Bhumi Realization according to Vinayas,
or according to Theravada, he saw the truth.
And then he and the Mughal potter both are best friend, best friend, and they have promise to each
other, whoever gain the nectar, god nectar, immediately going to share to the others.
They say, "We have to share each other." So as they promise to each other, when shari potter god,
he thought shari potter must share this to the mughal potters.
And he run to the mughal potter, mughal potter. And mughal potter saw far away shari potter, and in
mughal potter saw shari potter's skin and complexion are glowing.
So beautiful. He said, "It looks like mughal potter." He said, "It looks like you got nectar." He
said, "Yes, I got the nectar."
Yes, what that nectar is. And shari potter repeated what he heard from Dato.
He said, "One time, two time, three time, and third time, mughal potter god, the Realizations."
That all started with the beautiful conduct, beautiful moralities.
So therefore, morality is outreaching, and morality is the ornament of ours or any individual's.
Therefore, this noble path, all can be summarized into the morality, and then after that,
concentrations.